Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Center. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopes and
today I'm joined by Doctor Gul Sallali. She's assistant
professor in evolutionary Anthropology at University College London. Her
research focuses on human behavior and health using evolutionary
approaches. And today we're going to cover topics like
transitions from small scale groups to larger scale ones,
cumulative culture. The mulla Baka hunter gatherers and some
other related topics. So, Doctor Salali, welcome to the
show. It's a huge pleasure to everyone.
Thanks, Ricardo and uh thank you so much for
inviting me. I'm very excited to be part of
your great podcast.
Great. So, I know that uh just to start
off with, I know that you are interested in
sociocultural evolution, and I would like to start with
this question then. Do we have a good understanding
and explanation for transitions from small scale human groups
to large scale hierarchically more complex ones? I mean,
do we know how they occur?
Well, that's one of the big questions in anthropology
and archaeology. So how did humans go from living
in small scale relatively egalitarian groups like hunter gatherer
bands or tribes to larger scale, more complex, and
often hierarchical societies like nation states. But there is
no one single explanation. Uh, THERE are multiple factors,
uh, which we can count as like environmental, demographic,
and cultural factors. And I could say that one
major turning point was the emergence of agriculture, because
when people start agricultural practices that meant that there
is storage available and that there may be food
surpluses and people started settling, and this meant that
there are higher population densities. And this higher population
densities, which means that there are more people now
living in one place, that created some challenges. So
first, for example, how you are going to manage
resources and also there could be conflicts among people
because now there are many more people around you.
Um, SO these are challenges, but also, uh, population,
larger population densities also. Uh, CREATED new opportunities for,
for example, large scale cooperation. There were new opportunities
for exchanging information among, uh, many more people. And
over time, those pressures and also opportunities push societies
towards more uh complex and hierarchical political structures. Um,
AND also some scholars argued geography may play a
role here, uh, so often in less fragmented landscape.
There are great opportunities for information to circulate uh
through uh extended uh people, many other people, and
that allows for technologies to separate further which can
accelerate cultural evolution. Um, AND this is some scholars
argued why uh we see some large scale civilizations,
the emergence of first, uh, large scale civil civilizations
in places like Eurasia. Um, AND then I mentioned
cultural factors playing a role. Um, SO what I
mean by that is conflict, often conflict and cooperation
dynamics. Uh, SO especially in, um, areas with limited
resources, what happens with Growing population is that groups
start coming into more contact, um, and if there
are limited resources that push groups into conflict and
warfare. And what we see in human history is
that groups that are better able to coordinate themselves
but that are better able to cooperate um that
are more likely to out compete to other groups
and this often results in um also the evolution
towards larger groups through through warfare. And the kind
of coordination mechanisms could involve things like uh shared
rituals, strong institutions, or more centralized leaderships. Um, I
actually modeled some of these processes in a project
that we did 10 years ago, so it's been
a while since I really focused on this line
of research, but this was an exciting project because
I collaborated with a population ecologist and an anthropologist.
And we were actually interested there to use an
analogy from biology. So one of the major transitions
we see in biology is a transition from single
cell organisms to multicellular organisms, and we thought there
are some parallels between this process and the transition
from small scale to large scale groups because in
both situations. The kind of single cell or small
scale group need to relinquish their autonomy, but then
there are also some uh opportunities. For example, if
you're in a multicellular organism, then you may be
better protected against some external pressures. And so we
use this analogy and we, we made an agent-based
model. And one of the main um main things
we were looking at is how uh distribution of
resources kind of contributed to these transition dynamics from
small scale to large scale groups and how population
um structures population. Dynamics also influence that. So if
for example, in a low productivity patch in a
low productivity place, if you have a certain number
of people, there is going to be less capacity
for that land to maintain the people, so. Then
there may be more, uh, depending on what landscapes
are available in surrounding places that they may push
groups into conflict or cooperation. So what we see
is that when there are some right ecological conditions,
for example, in our models, if there are several
adjacent patches or landscapes that have higher productivity, then
we see that transition from more small scale to
larger scale groups. And what we see over generations
is that once this transition happens, we see that
the landscape was dominated by a few really large
groups and a number of smaller ones. So there
was this U-shaped distribution of human groups over generations
once that transition happens. Um, AND that's, um, similar
to that's what we see in most human history
as well. The world is dominated by a few
nations and a number of much smaller ones. Uh,
BUT of course the reality is much more complex
and it's not that kind of linear growth often
in history we see these cycles of rise and
collapse of big nations. So in short, um, this
kind of big complex question, there are environmental factors
like resource availability, resource distribution, but there are also
factors like demography, how many people live in an
in an area and also cultural factors, how groups
exchange information and able to coordinate themselves.
Great. That was a very comprehensive answer. So, you,
you've also studied and you even mentioned that briefly
in your previous answer. Uh, YOU'VE also studied the
topic of cultural evolution. So when it comes to
that, what is cumulative culture?
That's a good question, and I'm suspecting that some
of your audiences already knows about this topic. Well,
when we speak about cumulative cultural evolution, we're talking
about a process by which knowledge, skills and technologies
build up incrementally over generations. And this build up
often generates uh such cultural products that are very
complex, that are so complex that They are not
often possible for one single individual to invent by
themselves. So for example, if you think about a
smartphone, it's a combination of technologies developed over generations
by many people, uh, technologies like touchscreen, camera, information
technology. So this is, I always think that's a
good example of a product of cumulative cultural evolution.
Mhm. And are there aspects of social dynamics that
relate to cultural evolution uh cumulative culture, sorry. I
mean, I read in your work particularly about the
role of knowledge sharing networks, so could you tell
us about that?
Yeah, my colleagues and I have been interested in
this question. What are the mechanisms that gave rise
to cumulative cultural evolution? And um I have been
conducting field work in hunter gatherer groups and many
evolutionary anthropologists, we are interested in looking at extant
hunter gatherer groups because We lived by hunting and
gathering for most of the human history. So what
we're interested in is that what can, for example,
the social structure that we see in hunter gatherer
groups could tell us about information sharing, how, how
those uh the structures interplay with with how people
exchange information and whether um this. Uh, COULD be
one of the mechanisms of cumulative cultural evolution, how
the way people share information affect their ability to
develop more complex technologies and cultural traits. So we,
we have been interested in this kind of questions.
Um, AND for that, we, we often couple field
data, so we couple, for example, data of social
networks in extant hunter gatherer groups. So we have
these detailed genealogies, um, so we have information on
how people in one location are related to each
other and then we also have information on Uh,
how frequently those people interact with each other. Um,
AND then we couple this with some data on
um knowledge systems. For example, I've been interested in
how hunter gatherers living in the, in the forest
accumulate plant knowledge because they, they have really vast.
Uh, KNOWLEDGE of different plants, um, in one of
my field works. I was looking into that in
a hunter gatherer population in Congo, and from the
initial interviews, there were over 200 different plant species
that people mentioned using. So it's really diverse knowledge.
So, uh, one of our studies we found, we
looked at, uh, the social networks in hunter gatherers
and what we observe is that it's it they
are what physicists would or computer scientists would call
a small world network. So there are tightly knit
clusters, groups of people that are connected with each
other and they spend a lot of time with
each other. And these really tightly linked groups are
occasionally connected to other, other groups, and what we
observe is that this kind of small world network
structure where there is clustering of several groups and
some links between these groups and these links could
be. Friends in different groups that you visit or
some distant family members in different groups that you
visit. We see that that kind of uh clustered
uh network structure actually facilitates um cumulative cultural evolution.
And the reason for that is that um. It
allows first the knowledge to specialize in one group
and then then if you are connected to different
groups, um, then you could, you have the opportunity
to exchange this diverse knowledge. You have the opportunity
to recombine this diverse knowledge. And in many studies
in cumulative cultural evolution, we see that this recombination
process is quite important for innovation. Um, WELL, there
are some arguments that innovations often are not the
result of an individual, uh, smartness, like not the
result of one person all of a sudden inventing
something, but it's more about people recombining ideas in
a different way, so that producing new, new forms
of knowledge. Um, AND this also, uh, what we
see in the hunter gather social networks also replicated
in a way in more experimental lab studies with
groups of people and how they invent solutions to
a particular problem. Um, SO one idea, what I
talked about as small world networks is also, uh,
sometimes people refer to as partial connectivity. Um, SO
when people did experiments in the lab, they found
that if you have a 20 groups all trying
to generate a solution together for a particular problem,
the solutions that they come up with is often,
uh, they are often less efficient than the solutions
if you first divide these people into like groups
of say 5 or 10. And they work on
the solutions within their groups and then connect them
together and then allow them to exchange information. So
the solutions that these partially connected groups come up
with often are better than the fully connected groups,
which is kind of a similar process that we
see in hunter gatherers in a more larger scale.
That's very interesting. So you've done work among the
Muenele Bayaka hunter-gatherers. I hope I'm pronouncing the name
correctly. If not, please correct me. Uh, uh, WHAT
characterizes their society and then I'm going to ask
you about particular aspects of their society that you've
studied.
Mhm. Yeah, so in the Bayaka hunter gatherers are
one of the uh hunter gatherer groups who live
in across the Congo Basin. Uh, SO, uh, the
community I've been, um, visiting and studying since 2013.
They live in the northern Republic of Congo in
a wider dance rainforests. It's one of the largest
swamp forests in the world. Um, AND they, their
main subsistence mode is through hunting and gathering, and
there's division of labor. So, uh, usually manhunts and
men also collect honey, and women, they forage wild
plants, for example, tubers, wild leaves, and also women
do collective fishing. Um, AND one of the key
characteristics of these forest hunter togetherers are their mobiles,
so they change the groups uh who that's vary
between 20 to like say 60 people, uh, they
change their campsites depending on the the season and
the availability of food resources. Uh, ALSO, people often
go to stay in different camps where uh their
extended family members or friends live. Um, AND there
is immediate consumption of food, so there is no
food storage as in like industrialized populations or in
agricultural in like where what we see in farmers,
people often eat uh food that they gathered the
same day, or if not, they could smoke meat,
but even then the meat could be should be
consumed in a few days. Um, AND following that,
there is also no wealth accumulation, uh, especially with
mobility and that immediate kind of food consumption. You,
you can't really, you know, accumulate many resources. It
doesn't make much sense. Um, AND there is egalitarian
social structure so they people don't have a leader,
um, but the, the community, the conflicts are often
managed together by discussions. Um, THAT'S also part of
why, you know, but that's also part of being
a smaller scale society, as I mentioned. For the
the first introduction part that when group sizes increase,
that kind of conflict management don't work anymore, you
know, you can't just solve problems just by discussing
because there's so many people and some people are
even anonymous to you. But yeah, in, in extant
hunter gatherers in mobile hunter-gatherers, we see that kind
of more egalitarian social structure. And uh there is
cooperative care of children, so it's unlike the more
western uh way of raising children and family structure,
which is more like nuclear family. Children are looked
after by not only by the father and mother,
but by other community members. We've done some research
on this as well that I could talk about
if we have time. And then there is food
sharing, so there, there is a norm of, uh,
there's a social norm that if a meat is
brought into the camp that it needs to be
shared with the community members and there are some
rules on which part of the meat should be
shared with whom. So that's in general that the
characteristics of um of a mobile, uh more uh
less hierarchically structured hunter gatherer society.
So, and one of the phenomenon that you've studied
among them has to do with future discounting. What
is this phenomenon and what functions do immediate return
systems serve?
Mhm. Yes, so future discounting is this um is
this concept that the preference for more immediate rewards
over larger and delayed rewards. So this, this concept
is used um most commonly in behavioral economics experiments,
so. People, for example, ask you a question of,
oh, do you prefer to receive $10 tomorrow or
$100 in a month. So that's kind of these
kind of experiments they use to measure how much
your discounting feature and they look at different variables
in um what explains people's level of future discounting.
So I was interested in this phenomenon testing this
phenomena in in hunter gatherer groups because, um, by
definition their their society is immediate return, so the
food is consumed immediately, as I said, um, and
there is not much concept of savings or storing
something for later. For example, in Bayaka they do
trade with farmers, but it's often the case that
when they trade the forest products and um they
don't necessarily get money from the farmer traders, but
they exchange with some farmers' products or alcohol or
cigarettes. There is not, I haven't witnessed many occasions
where A Bayaka would say, oh, let me get
earn this money, and then I will like save
this money up and then in a month, maybe
I will buy this. Um, SO I was interested
in like looking, then I had this idea that
the, uh, future discounting or levels of future discounting
is probably influenced by the by the kind of
subsistence, uh, we have. And I predicted that once
people started storing foods, like once the emergence of
agriculture started. People also started, it made more sense
for people to think about more future orientedly, you
know, start saving, or you had to wait for
the crops to grow or for for your animals
to grow to to grow up. Um, SO I
wanted to test these ideas in a smaller scale.
There is variation in how much Bayaka hunter gatherers
are markets integrated. Um, SO almost all Bayaka, they
trade with farmers, even, even the ones living further
away from the farmer villages like in the forest,
usually farmers come and live with them so that
they can continue trading. They can continue by getting.
Wild animals and then selling uh the hunter's other
products. So there is that kind of trade for
almost every Bayaka, but there is a variation in
how much they engage in this trade. For example,
uh, some communities I I stayed with in northern
Congo, they prefer living in larger settlements in logging
towns, um, and these Baako communities often engage in
more wage labor. So I did, I conducted interviews
in those locations and also in locations where the
Bayak live further away from these towns and I
found that um yes, they, the engagement and wage
labor, so like working in farmers' farms or working
for the the logging company is much higher in
uh Bayaka settlements that are closer to towns. Also,
I found that so the Bayaka. Pay bride price.
I found that in people who live closer to
those those towns, logging towns, they pay higher sums
of bride price and there is larger variation in
how much people pay as a bride price so
this kind of Shows that there may be some
inequalities emerging among people in terms of how much
money they they may have or they might save.
So, um, I wanted to use that variation and
I did this experiment where I asked people whether
they would like to have one stock cube today.
So stock cubes are, you know, these like uh
muggy kind of food additives that people really like
to use um uh to, you know, flavor their
dishes. Um, SO I asked people whether they would
like to have one, stock cube today or they
would like to have 5 tomorrow. So you may
ask or if any behavior the economists are listening,
like what is this temporal discount model is just
today versus tomorrow. I tried so many different combinations,
but it's such an alien concept, like, again, saving,
for example, for 5 days, it didn't work. Everyone
would say, give me just now, you know. So
my, you know, my choice was between today, 11
today versus 5 tomorrow. Um, AND what we found
was that people living more in forests or engaging
in trade, but less perhaps less often, um, they
chose mostly they chose, yeah, just now, give me
one now, whereas people living more in those settlements
closer to towns who engage in more wage labor.
They, um, half of the, uh, the participants chose
to wait for tomorrow. Also, I did this in
with a small group of farmers and their replies
were their choices were similar to the, to the
Bayaka who were living closer to towns.
Uh, WHEN it comes to culture and again among
the Bayaka hunter-gatherers, you have studied also the phenomenon
of global weirding. What is this phenomenon about and
what did you learn about changes specifically in planet
knowledge?
Mhm. Again, this is like the discontinuation of my
interests uh of seeing variation among different hunter gatherer
groups. They are the same community just to emphasize,
but some people, some Bako choose to live closer
to, uh, to these towns and choose to engage
in more wage labor, especially younger, younger generation. Um,
SO when it comes to global weirding, so perhaps
I should start by what weird means in this
context. Uh, SO weird is this acronym that was
coined by, uh, Joe Henri and his colleagues, uh,
which stands for Western educated industrialized rich democratic societies.
And they published this paper back in 2010, I
think, kind of showing how much research in psychology
and behavioral sciences are conducted with weird population and
how this is problematic because we don't get to
see the full spectrum of human behavior and variation
on human behavior. Um, SO that's this acronym has
been used done in research, often in psychology research,
and it was um a seminal paper in the
sense that calling for scientists to do more conducting
to more um studies on non-weird societies. And um,
and in response to I think that paper, uh,
there was, um, I think it was Paul Rosen
who coined, or no, maybe it was um I
found that global weirding term, I think in an
eon uh essay online and I quite liked the
term because Um, that's what we are seeing in
most parts of the world, that, uh, the cultural
products from the Western industrial populations are started, they
started to dominate, uh, the, the cultural landscape of
many other societies. So that's, I think what that's
what. People referred as global weirding. For example, GPS
technology uh are used more and more commonly instead
of uh traditional wayfinding techniques. Um, SO in line
with that kind of how these new cultural products
are replacing the older ones, I wanted to look
at, uh, plant knowledge and uses in Bayaka community
and also their preference for traditional medicine. So historically,
because Bayaka don't have much access to Western medicine.
The first, um, um, healing practice is based on
traditional plant medicine. And I wanted to see how
the variation in this kind of market integration uh
is correlated with people's knowledge and use of medicinal
plants and also whether their preferences for traditional medicine
versus Uh, Western medicines are shifting. Um, AGAIN, this
was an ideal setting to do this research is
also because the logging town I mentioned where I
do some of my research, there is um a
hospital there, like a small hospital maintained by the
logging company and uh sometimes uh Bayaka hunter gatherers
also use the hospital. So I wanted to see
whether Uh, people living settled close to those, uh,
this town, and the Baka prefer still prefer traditional
medicine practices or they would prefer going to, uh,
the hospital. And what I find is that again,
um, the generation, the settlements close to that town
is is relatively new. So Most living there are
younger generations and that uh participants mentioned preferring uh
Western medicine or traditional medicine more more often compared
to other locations where I did field work where
is further away from that logging town. Uh, THEY
said they would majority said they uh use traditional
medicine. And only if it doesn't work, then they
consider trying to get to the hospital nearby. I
also found that in the logging town, people had
fewer uses of plants, so they knew fewer plants
and they also need fewer wild plants. So there
is kind of these shifts, but it doesn't mean
that they are not hunting and gathering or they
don't know about the forest. These people still do
hunt and gather and they still have much more
knowledge of forests than a layperson like me. But
there are some changes based on where people choose
to live.
So another thing that you've studied has to do
with the social organization of mobile hunter-gatherers. So their
social organization is characterized, among other things, by low
within camp relatedness and fluid met groups. In what
ways do factors like pair bonding and sex egalitarianism
contribute to that?
Yeah, that's a, that's a good question and um.
Maybe I can talk about a bit, uh, the.
Uh, KIND of the mating system we see in
the Baka and many other immediate immediate return hunter
gatherers is serial monogamy. So there are long term
pair bones as opposed to, say, polygenyva in many
farmer groups you see one man marrying multiple um
women at the same time, but this doesn't occur
that much in the Baka. Uh, MOSTLY people marry
one person, they stay together with one person, but
they can divorce after a while and marry another
person, so that's what we mean by serial monogamy.
Um And in Bayaka, both sexes have equal say
in where they live after they marry. So that's
what we anthropologists call a multi-local residence pattern. This
is again in contrast to what we see in
many farmers, uh, farmer societies who that are more
often partly local, so often. When you marry, uh,
you as a bride tend to move to the
groom's side of family. So you, you start living
with your husband's family. Um, SO what's, uh, my
colleagues and I thought that this actually could contribute
to the level of relatedness we see in different
groups. Um, SO if you. There is some, there
may be some difference in how much people are
related if everyone is living with the groom's side
of family or if people are free to choose
which side of the family to live. So some
people go live with their wife's family and some
people go live with their husband's family. And also
the reason for that is the rule of exogamy
that we see in many populations. So in the
Bayaka, for example, there is a rule against marrying
your own family. Um, SO that also kind of
creates uh that mixing with unrelated people. Um, SO
to test these ideas, uh, my colleagues and I
used both our empirical data that we collected in
the field. As I mentioned, we did lots of
genealogical interviews, so we knew in one place how
people were related to each other. Uh, SO we
did that research both in in Bayaka hunter gatherers
and some of my colleagues did the same with
ACTA hunter gatherers in the Philippines, and there are
also some uh previous anthropological work published showing the
relatedness in other hunter gatherer groups. Um, AND we
also collected some data on relatedness among farmer, patri
local farmer groups. Um, AND we coupled this with
an agent-based model where we simulate what happens, what
happens when people married someone and started living with
the husband's side of family versus what happens when
people married someone and some chose to live with
the wife's part of family and some chose to
live with the husband's side of family. And what
we see is that over, over generations, over simulation
time is that when there is sex equality in
residential decision making, uh, this pattern results in uh
groups that are less related to each other. So
in one location, there may be more number of
unrelated people overall to to you as a person.
Whereas in in occasions in groups where people only
lived with say their husband's side of family over
time that led to groups that are more related
to each other. So this also really what we
see in the simulation results also match very well
with what we gathered through the empirical data that
for example, in all the hunter gatherer populations that
we studied, the number of unrelated people in the
camp to a focal person was 17%. Whereas this
number for the patri local farmer group was 4%.
So in the hunter gatherer groups, there were many
more unrelated people because of that decision making processes.
So, you are also interested in evolutionary approaches to
mental health. What do we know about the prevalence
of mental disorders among hunter-gatherer populations?
Well, I must say not much. This is a
topic that's been, I think that many more scholars
are more interested in now looking into um under
examining mental health problems in hunter gatherers. But methodologically
it's challenging when we talk about kind of measuring
the prevalence of a certain mental health disorder like
say autism or depression rates. Um, THERE are several
reasons why it's methodologically challenging. One is the definition
and categorization of these mental health disorders, let alone
in small scale populations in the Western world, it's,
it's still debated, you know, there are often we
see changes to diagnostic manuals because there are some
disagreements among the professionals about how you would categorize
a certain. Disorder mental disorder. So there is this
problem of categorization. Um, BUT also, uh, most of
the diagnostic tools are based on, say, scales and
really long questionnaires, and these are really hard to
translate into a different cultural. Community, especially this community,
uh, the dominant culture is oral culture that there
is nothing written and it like, you know, it's
sometimes quite hard to translate a questionnaire into Um,
into a way that would really take into account
that culture's, uh, view, worldview. Um, SO we some
anthropologists, um, who are interested in these problems, and
now we're, we established a network, we're having workshops
and discussing these issues and trying to find ways
to uh Answer these questions, look at these mental
health problems in small scale populations in a way
that is culturally appropriate, uh, in a way that
takes into account that culture's own world views and
how these illnesses could be manifested differently in different
different cultures. So that's that's actually an ongoing work.
Uh, YEAH, and, but with all of those limitations,
are we able to tell if there are differences
in rates of mental disorders between hunter-gatherer societies and
industrialized societies?
Um From what we know from very limited studies
looking into mental health problems in extant hunter gatherers,
for example, there is a, there was a recent
study on postpartum depression in Haza women, and the
researchers found high rates of postpartum depression. Um, AMONG
Hasa women, but the reasons that they give were
quite different to the reasons that we see in
the Western world. So in the West, one of
the correlates of PPD is the lack of social
support, whereas in Hatsa, women didn't mention much lack
of social support, but what they mentioned was anxieties
related to infants' health. And we know that in
in these populations there is still very high childhood
mortality. Um, SO the reasons for depression and anxiety
after giving birth is mostly related to that. And
in another study, some researchers looked into depression symptoms
in the Tesimane horticulturalists. So these are people who
mix hunting with some gardening. Um, AND they find
that again, um, around 10% of the participants, uh,
could be, uh, could be defined as as depressed
based on the scale that they, they used. So
it's not like it's not that there is, we
don't see any prevalence of these mental health problems
in small scale hunter gatherer groups, but again in
the testimony, what the researchers found is that the
symptoms of depression were correlated with rate of infections,
so people who have higher infection rates tend to
be more depressed. And so what we see in
general is that yes, there are mental health problems
in these societies as well, but the underlying reason
could be quite different to the underlying reasons that
we see in the Western world. And also there
are some studies that look at overall well-being and
that looks at self-reported happiness in these communities and
in general, the results suggest that they have like
the foragers like Khasa, Tsimane or Baka in Cameroon.
Uh, THEY have higher self-reported happiness compared to many
people in industrialized societies. So mental health problems occur,
but also the kind of life satisfaction, overall life
satisfaction could be higher as well.
AND what could explain these differences?
Well, I think, um, to me, rather than to
me, the interesting question is not the rate of
pre prevalence of these mental health disorders in different
human groups, because I think that Uh, there is
a reason why we have emotions, again, like evolutionaries,
I'm guessing that you interviewed Randy I and he,
he's like, he's really good at explaining all these.
So based on that view, you would expect to
see every kind of emotion and also the spectrums
in any in any society. But what I'm more
interested in understanding the uh the mechanisms and the
differences in mechanisms given rise to these. Um, Hard
emotions or mental health problems, uh, in different societies.
So, um, in one of book chapters, my colleague
Nick Chowdhury and I talked about evolutionary mismatches that
may underlie some of these challenges that we face
in um in more. Uh, INDUSTRIALIZED Western societies. So
we, we compare, for example, social structure, um, child
rearing practices, childhood, um, in more small scales like
hunter gatherer groups with more Western groups and how
these differences in social structure might have might contribute
to Some of the challenges, emotional difficulties we're experiencing
in the Western world. One example is, um, again
in, in the Bayaka I mentioned that uh there
is another hierarchical social structure, so the group is
egalitarian and there is tight social networks, so people,
the community is very important. Whereas in many industrialized
cultures, there is a big emphasis on social status
and the society is much more hierarchical. And this
may put additional pressures on individuals to achieve things
that they may not be able to, you know,
and I think these pressures can result in um
problems like anxiety and depression. And they say in
Randya in his papers really beautifully. I think discuss
these how these structural. Uh, COMPONENTS in the modern
world could actually cause problems.
Right. Yeah, I have an interview on the show
with Doctor Randy Nessie. So if people are interested
about his book, Good Reasons for Bad Feelings, if
people are interested, they can go and watch it
as well. Um, TALKING now about physical health, what
do we know about patterns of physical activity among
children in hunter-gatherer societies and children in industrialized societies?
Yeah, so I really enjoy spending time with Bayaka
children because they're full of life and they always,
they always want to show you the forest and
the activities they do, they, they, they are very
keen to involve you in their activities. So I
like hanging out in the field with children a
lot. And they are very physically active. From the
moment they start walking, they start engaging in physically
demanding activities like even walking in this forest is
really challenging because it's very dense rainforests with a
closed canopy, so you have to use machete all
the time to open way, um, and then it's
swamp forests, so you're if you're, uh, for example,
fishing. AND walking in the streams, you're constantly getting
stuck in mud. Um, AND of course children are
much more talented compared to me in walking in
swamps. Um, SO children are exposed to these activities,
even when their babies as they are being carried
on the back of their mothers or other caregivers,
often other children. Um, AND also from the moment
they start walking, they, they get to practice these
challenging activities. Um, SO the kind of life, and
also the subsistence that they do hunting and foraging
requires them to be really physically active. And on
top of that play is a very important part
of growing and hun together childhood. Um. So what
I wanted to do is I wanted to look
at the physical activity patterns in Bayaka children and
compare that to what we see in in Western
children. And so we gathered this data in the
field. We use activity trackers. They're like Fitbit like
devices, and we ask children to carry them on
their usually upper arms. Uh, FOR a period of
time, usually a week. Um, AND then, uh, my
former PhD students analyzed the data, and there are
in the UK and in the US we are
lucky that there are publicly available data sets of
physical activity in children. So we, we could then
gather these data sets and compare the activity patterns
among these groups, and what we found is not
surprisingly that Bayaka children were much more active on
average than um children in the UK and the
US. Um, FOR example, on average, we found that
Bayaka children per day engaged over 3 hours of
moderate to vigorous physical activity. And uh that's 3
times of the WHO recommendation already, and it's much
more than an average British teenager. Um But there
are some other interesting patterns. So for example, uh,
in our sample, we had like children from. 3
to 16, and what we saw is that their
physical activity levels increased by age. But when we
look at children in the US, we saw a
different pattern on opposite direction. I think it was
after around 5, physical activity in children in the
US started declining. And we interpret this as perhaps
the consequence of formal schooling where, you know, children
starts in they have more structured education and they
start sitting down over periods of time. So that
was one contrast between the two groups. And then
in Bayaka, children, their activity levels varied more by
days. So like in one day say they would
do a lot of activities, but in the next
day they may do much less. Whereas there wasn't
as much variation in activity levels among the children
in the US. And then another interesting finding was
that uh we did a small analysis of the
um going to bed times and wake up times.
And what we saw is that, you know, in
the Western world, we talk about teenagers sleeping uh
all all morning. The researchers say teenage chronotype, I
think. Um, WE saw that in Bayaka, yes, teenagers
went to bed later, but everyone woke up together,
so there wasn't like staying, staying in bed for
for a long time.
Yeah, and what can we learn about childhood physical
activity and well-being that we could apply to industrialized
societies to promote better health outcomes when it comes
to non-communicable diseases?
Um, WELL, I guess that that requires a bit
some uh reforms in the education system as well.
So when we look at Paaka childhood, one of
the most striking features of children is the autonomy
that they have. Um, SO most of the time
when they, when they're playing in playgroups, there isn't
an adult. There is just children of mixed ages.
Um, FOR example, last time when I was in
the field, um, I want in one morning, a
bunch of children, maybe 1012 children, decided that they
wanted to go for fishing. It was fishing season.
So they just took small pots and small machetes
and baskets and just went off the forest by
themselves and then fish small fish. Um, SO that
that kind of autonomy is quite striking, and that
we often don't get to give that much of
autonomy to children. I think we don't see them
as um You know, perhaps we don't trust them
as much. But one of the reasons why also,
Baka children could do that is because of this
kind of mixed age structure where older children do
look after the younger ones and um the younger
ones often learn skills and knowledge of the forest
by observing and imitating the older ones. Um, SO
I think there could be more emphasis on like
peer learning, um, and more perhaps cooperation among children.
Of course, playing and outdoor activities. I mean, the
whole home of Bayaka children is the forest, so
it's um it's very different, um. Kind of architectural
environments compared to the environments of people living in
the cities, but I think there are some, you
know, there are some new trends, relatively new trends
in education as well. They are like forest schools
or like more schools, I think now emphasize outdoor
activities in childhoods. I think one of the determinants
of well-being also as an educator, I see in
my own students, they are older students, they are
undergraduate students, but over years. What I see is
that growing rise of anxiety and depression problems. And
I think the main reason for that is our
education system being really performance based. Uh, WHEREAS in
Bayaka children, uh, the learning is from children's intrinsic
motivation. They, they learn because that's the way of
life. They need to, you know, be able to
get food in the forest. So that kind of
I did the. And the need to learn comes
intrinsically, whereas I think in our education system, there
is a lot of emphasis, not on the process
of the learning, but on the outcome, on the
performance, which cause tremendous amount of stress to people.
But it's unfortunately also the reflection of how our
society works, how the adult life works.
Right. So still on the topic of health or
health factors, I would like to ask you now
about alcohol, alcohol consumption among hunter-gatherers. Uh, TELL us
specifically about the work you've done on that topic
among the Bae hunter-gatherers again and how alcohol consumption
relates to health outcomes.
Mhm. Yes, so in many hunter gatherer groups around
the world, what we see is that these groups
are often more are marginalized. They have restrictions on
their land use and they experience more and more
restrictions on their mobility because of the external pressures.
Um, FOR example, in Congo, there's pressures from logging
companies and even conservation groups. So there's, there are
some incentives to make people settle down in um,
in places, um, and those pressures also, um, bring
about friction and lack of autonomy in what people
want to. HAVE in their future, and they also
threaten their traditional ways of life. So I think
especially the lack of autonomy people have contributes to
that um increasing levels of alcohol consumption that we
observe over the years of like every time we
go back to field, um, I could say that
there is more and more um. Emphasis on. Um,
SPENDING all their money, money in a way that's
spending all their foraging efforts in alcohol. So for
example, many buy a car, when they sell meat
to farmers, they in exchange, they get out they
prefer getting alcohol than, for example, other agricultural products
like cassava roots. Um, SO we were interested in
actually looking at quantitatively alcohol consumption because we know
that in many parts of the world that's what's
happening with indigenous populations. There is alcohol consumption, but
there is not much study on, uh, quantitatively looking
at it. So we conducted interviews in the field
with communities, we stayed in. About how much they
drink per day, what kind of drinks they drink,
but we also did these interviews with pregnant and
breastfeeding women. So one thing to to say that
there though like uh drinking alcohol is a big
part of rituals in in the among the Bayaka
and it's not surprising, you know, it's the same
for us like when we are we have weddings
and in many cultures, not all, but in many
cultures, alcohol is part of these celebrations. So in
the sense, Bayaka also love to drink alcohol um
in big rituals, initiation ceremonies. But there is also
day to day drinking we observe, especially in men.
And so when we looked at our data, what
we found is about 50 55% of men and
35% of women in among our participants exceeded WHO
thresholds for risky drinking. Um, SO it's quite a
high rate of alcohol consumption among the participants. And
also we found that, um, like in accordance with
our field observations as well, about 40% of women
who are pregnant or breastfeeding said they they drink
alcohol. So there is some lack of, I think.
Information or knowledge on how alcohol consumption may influence
child development um in the community, and there are
consequences of it. So when when when people drink
large amounts of alcohol, we see that uh there
are more fights occurring in the community and there
is more violence. Um, AND also that kind of
makes it easier for the neighboring traders to exploit
farm and the Bayaka's labor, and most often, uh,
farmer traders, they give alcohol to some Bayaka men,
especially in advance, and then those men are done
in debt. They, they have debts to these. Uh
PEOPLE where they need to engage in labor or
they need to hunt meat for them, so that
kind of dependence relationship emerges as a result of
alcohol consumption. And we also found some positive associations
between alcohol consumption and blood pressure and experiencing diarrhea
um in the past weeks.
So, I have one last topic I would like
to ask you about. Could you tell us about
the work you've done on childcare networks and how
they contribute to learning to parent?
Mhm. So this is a recent work that uh
we did again with my my colleague Nicil Choudhury.
He, uh, when we were in the field, he
did these detailed observations following children, infants age 0
to 4 over an extended period and using this
data, um, we could look at who contributes to
childcare, uh, how people respond to infants stresses, like
for example, when when infants cry. We also coupled
these observations with the social network data we gathered
that I mentioned before. So we had this um
a quite detailed uh or like large, more larger
scale data set where we could see who interacts
with whom more often, so we could then see
uh who were interacting with infants more common. And
we could use that data to look at who
uh provides care to children more often. And we
were looking, we were most interested in cooperative childcare.
So in anthropology, we talk about all the mothers,
which means uh people other than the mother who
takes care of children. And I think in a
nutshell, the most interesting results that we see both
in the the Bayaka and also in the ACTA
hunter gatherers in the Philippines is that the majority
of these all mothers are older children, children themselves,
so they contribute a lot to childcare. Um, ONE
of the reasons is also that there are large
numbers of children, so together collectively their contribution is,
is high. And um what I'm interested in and
what I'm at the moment, writing as a blog
post for the Sapiens magazine, which hopefully will be
published soon, is that that contribution of children to
childcare also prepares children to be good parents to
they prepare them. HAVE to respond to The babies,
they prepared, um, they make them learn how to
parent themselves as well. For example, in the field,
I often see teenage girls, uh, putting breastfeeding babies
into them onto their breasts, although they don't have
milk themselves, uh, they get to suit the babies,
but at the same time, this is kind of
a practice for breastfeeding for the teenage girls. Which
um we know it's quite a challenging, uh, process.
We, we would think breastfeeding, I guess for a
naive person would be like quite easy. It's a
natural process, but it's actually not many Western women
experience. Many women report experiencing many difficulties breastfeeding or
initiating breastfeeding. So I think um the involvement in
childcare. Uh, IN Bayaka children also helps them learn
parenting skills.
Great. So, Doctor Salali, just before we go, would
you like to tell people where they can find
your work on the internet?
Yes, so they can find my work on my
website. Um, IF they Google my name, Denis Salala,
uh, they will come up with um my UCL
profile, but also I have a website and on
Google Scholar, I have most, I think I have
all my papers publicly available. Also, I have a
YouTube channel where I put short videos of our
field work. So I recently uploaded a 10 minute
documentary on Baka childhood called Rising in the Forest,
so they could also check that if they're interested.
Great. So thank you so much for taking the
time to come on the show. It's been a
big pleasure to talk with you.
Thank you very much. It was likewise.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Matri Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes calling in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir Samuel Andrea, Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Lays and the Samuel Curriere,
Heinz, Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David
Sloan Wilson, Asila dearraujoro and Roach Diego Londonorea. Yannick
Punteran Rosmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevskynaleb medicine, Gary
Galman Samov Zaledrianei Poltonin John Barboza, Julian Price, Edward
Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fry, Franca Bartolotti Gabrielon Scorteus
Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fis Tim Duffyani Smith John Wieman.
Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio
Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Vozin, David Williams, the Augusta,
Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Coralli
Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, Old Heringbo.
Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassy Zigoren, Jeff
McMahon, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Stor, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brendon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursulauddinov,
Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff Sean Nelson, Mike Levine. And
yoursnacht, a special thanks to my producers. These are
Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis
Dixon, Benedict Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and
to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan
Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.